hello and welcome to this live Q&A this
is the next installment in a whole
series of live Q&A s that we're doing as
part of the Oxford Sparks science at
home campaign if you're new here then
why not subscribe and keep up to date
with all my latest content if you're not
new here then welcome back it's really
great to have you here and if you're not
following us on Facebook Instagram and
Twitter please do so we're at Oxford
sparks so today I am delighted to be
joined by dr. Tom Crawford if you don't
recognize that name then you might
recognize the at Tom Rocksmith YouTube
channel so today we're going to be
chatting about everything from maths
itself to maybe some maths tattoos maybe
some things about how he got into doing
these YouTube videos and so hello Tom
say hello Tom hello Fiona edges to be
here hello everybody joining us for the
chat so should we get straight into it
or do you want me to tell you tell
everyone a bit more about myself I think
you've got a great job with the
introduction yeah and a bit of both
really say and yeah it'd be great if you
could just introduce yourself in a
couple of minutes maybe introduce your
research area and what do people mean
about you okay perfect well I think you
started with the key thing which is I am
a mathematician here at the University
here in Oxford I'm currently in in my
office where I teach
hence my blackboard I live in the same
building as my office just to confirm I
am NOT there's no reading anymore so and
as Fiona said I also do lots of mass
communication sort of science
communication work through Tom rocks
maths which is my online platform so app
Tom Knox master Turner Express calm this
whole whole thing sort of a bit of a
theme going on and what I tried to do is
I try to teach maths or talk about maths
but I try to make it as fun engaging
exciting as possible so I I remember
myself most math lectures you go to
whilst they they get the content across
often they're not the most
exciting things shall we say it's
potentially true for most lectures so I
try my best to to still present quite
complicated material sometimes also some
simpler stuff but I'm still sometimes I
am tackling university level maths but
I'm trying to get excited about it and
present it in interesting and new unique
ways yeah and then my actual research
was in fluid dynamics so my PhD was
looking at the movement of fluids this
is the the field of fluid dynamics
I should mention at this point when we
say fluid in the field we actually mean
anything that changes shape to fit the
container that it's inside so this this
often gets people because you think
fluid you know naturally you would
associate that with a liquid but for
fluid dynamics this includes gases as
well can you include some solids so for
example that's my question what was that
sorry does it include ice yes that was
exactly what I was about to say because
yeah I think you work in that field
right so that's why you're probably
thinking about ice and whatnot so yes if
you see a time-lapse video of a glacier
or an ice sheet for example where you
know you're you're watching it over a
period of months but then you speed it
up it literally looks like a river
flowing down a mountain and so it does
actually behave like a fluid in that
sense obviously you slightly modify the
equations a little bit for something
like ice but they still work and we can
still model and understand this and the
particular question that I'm interested
in is sort of where does river water to
go when it enters the ocean so we're
looking at the interaction between river
water and ocean water and the main
motivation for this study beyond it
being incredibly interesting
mathematically for a fluid dynamics
perspective of course is that of course
the the oceans are pretty polluted this
is a reasonably well known sort of fact
and we want to do odd better job of
cleaning them up making them better and
a lot of the pollution in fact 80% of
the Polli
in the ocean comes from land-based
sources and most of this is entering the
ocean through the river system so if
we're able to understand what happens to
that river water containing the
pollution if we know more about how that
spreads in the ocean itself then we can
figure out which areas are most
susceptible to pollution and then when
we try and mean things up and try and
combat the problem you can then focus
your resources on those particular areas
so ideally we'd clean up the whole ocean
right that'd be best-case scenario
obviously fortunately don't have the
time of sources right we just it's just
not gonna happen right so so you have to
think of other ways to do that so you
want to maximize the resources you have
so we can focus on the areas where the
river water goes because that will be
carrying most of the pollution so that's
the big picture question I can go more
into the nitty-gritty details if we like
I could even draw a little diagram sorry
well this is probably a good point for
me to just interject and say that the
brilliant thing about as being live is
that you can ask questions so if you've
got a question for Tom if it's about the
fluid dynamics things we were just
chatting about or something related to
his channel then please do send them in
and I can see and I'm not just really
looking away from the screen I'm keeping
an eye on the questions that we already
have a couple and but maybe you could
just go into a little bit more detail
about that I personally want to see a
diagram I was saying what we're looking
at rivers flowing into the ocean so you
want to picture you have in mind and
this is obviously this is an idealized
setup right I'm not gonna go to testing
with my artistic skills so this is going
to be the land this is your River river
and this is also the land right and this
is gonna be the coast now in the
northern hemisphere because of the
direction of the Earth's rotation when
the water enters into this ocean so I
should label this as ocean
when the river water enters the Coriolis
effect so this is the sort of invisible
force because the earth is rotating one
way to think it's all by when water
shoots from a sprinkler in your guard
and it doesn't go straight it has a bit
of a curve to its path because of the
root so this force means that when the
water comes in it actually turns to the
right and this is true in the Northern
Hemisphere and the southern hemisphere
it will turn to the left
sure now and I say left and right - this
is not north south east or west you want
to ignore your compass points because
this doesn't matter whether this is
pointing north or south the its to do it
left and right in the sense of imagine
traveling down the river so you're like
floating along in your boat and when you
get to the end and reach the ocean
whether you're traveling north-south
whatever when you get to the end you
will be pushed to the right so that's
the picture to have you need to
literally be traveling down the river
and you will turn to the right in the
north left in the south and then what
happens what we saw in my experiments
and then we did some fieldwork actually
got to sail around the sea for six weeks
on a boat which was both fun and also
really boring
look at the ship for six weeks so it
forms this really large sort of
whirlpool region near the river mouth so
it's coming in it's turning to the right
hand side and you get this really large
just think of it as like a giant swirl
the technical term would be a vortex but
we'll pull big swirly mess is there all
the same thing so it comes in sort of
forms it's like my thumbs
exactly and then you also then get a
costal current which flows down here so
the river water enters the Earth's
rotation creates this Coriolis force
causing it to turn to the right and as
it does so some parts of the water
remain in this large whirlpool but some
parts escape
and then continue to move to the right
and continue along the coast so in the
context of pollution there are two key
things here first of all a large amount
of the pollution will be concentrated
around the river maps so this is really
good news because it's always the same
area right for a bigger River it's a
bigger area but we can just smash this
with clean up and that's great that's
like a really good way of attacking the
problem and the issue is this bit that
goes along your coast mm-hmm few reasons
so first of all most people live along
coasts they are nice regions of the
world to live in and so the water is
actually most polluted along the coast
mmm
general so that is sort of the first
issue and then second this is trapped
water in the whirlpool is trapped but
the water here can sort of escape and
like you can think of it as like escape
out or bleed out into the rest of the
ocean so this bit is kind of the issue
because this will start to propagate and
spread the pollution further and further
away from the original source so this is
trickier to manage and this is kind of
easier to manage yeah make sense so that
in short is sort of the basics of the of
the river outflow and how water moves
and you know we can then I can go into
more detail about the exact maps of it
but I'm quite I'm quite keen to take
some questions so yeah if you have
questions about this please do send them
in and it's so interesting and I really
love hearing about this because I think
you know there's a lot of people sat in
math lessons at schools thinking how can
this ever be applied in the real world
and actually it's things like this and
it's things that we might not even have
thought of so yeah it's really great to
hear I'm wondering if I should just dive
straight in with this it was a question
that came in within seconds right off
the bat as for later questions keep it
clean people keep it clean so first one
you're pretty well named for stripping
off while explaining maps to people have
you ever stripped down beyond your boxes
in a mathematical way well I guess I can
kind of say yes No
so so perhaps no I have never done a
video where I actually so in the videos
I sort of strict back the layers of an
equation and like I said to try and make
it a little bit more fun and exciting I
happen to strip back myself and I should
also for people who don't know I'm glad
you offered the explanation which I
meant to be a bit of fun it's meant to
be a bit of comedy so like in the videos
it's it's you know suddenly I'm talking
about layer one and then I just like cut
and I just don't have a shirt on I'm
like oh or a layer two now and then I
carry on it's it's you know nobody
actually wants to get undressed on her
I'm right like it's I definitely don't
it's more about it's a bit of fun just
something different and diverse small
bad but then so yeah I I tend to pick
equations on purpose that have four or
five layers a difficulty that I can
strip back and then I wear the
appropriate layers of clothing so that I
end up in my pants in my underwear
it has people very thought out yeah but
then the other part of the question is I
actually recently took part in a mass
photography exhibition and I exhibited
some of my tattoos and when I was doing
the photo shoot for the tech for the
exhibition I actually have some tattoos
where I to make the photo look better
Lee there were such things as
mathematical photography exhibition see
so that's pretty cool um should we
should be told tattoos now seeing as
they cropped up naturally I can I can
see some John I tell people I know
you've got maths ones which is pretty
cool many many math ones yeah well
seeing as I was talking here about my my
research so I can start with hopefully
everybody can see this yeah you know
okay so we have a formula here which I
will also write on the board so it says
hates divided by H naught equals one
minus alpha T the one minus alpha
okay so this tattoo on my arm and this
was the according to my examiner in my
PhD
this was the key result of my research I
didn't realize this myself I will be
honest until the examiner till told me
and then it became apparent that perhaps
it was so this relates the the depth of
the vortex
so here I've shown a bird's-eye view but
of course the vortex has a debt so if
this is the this is the vortex depth H
then H naught is it starting depth so we
usually label things with a subscript
zero to show that it starts at t equals
naught like the start of the measurement
yeah so this is the initial depth this
is the the depth that changes and in
this relationship this alpha parameter
so this one I've actually missed offer
letter the Alpha I the term here this is
your initial vorticity when I drew my
picture of my whirlpool I said that you
can sort of measure the strength of that
rotation the strength of the vorticity
you can measure that and that is labeled
alpha so again this is your initial
depth initial vorticity so initial
strength of the rotation and then this
is the depth changing over time and this
is the change in the vorticity over time
which is why it has the T and so this
relationship I showed verified list of
experiments and derived it
mathematically and it was slightly
different to what had been seen before
so previously this term wasn't there so
we just had 1 over 1 minus alpha I in
the previous situations but in my
experiments if that was true that would
say that the depth was constant because
it would be depth over constant equals
constants everywhere so debt would have
to be a constant but in my experiments
of the depth so if this is time this is
the depth
hey so if it was constantly would just
look like that wouldn't change but what
I saw was a very very gentle
sort of decrease in the death it wasn't
quite a straight line but there was a
decrease in my data and so I had to try
and explain this I did lots of
experiments kept getting the same thing
and so I think maybe it's actually are
before the formula needed modifying and
that was what led me to to do that so
that was the comment which is that
you've kind of given yourself the
ultimate crib sheet and the ability to
cheat an exam so we're wondering what in
ventilators might have to say about that
well I actually know this because
because somebody I've been asked this
many times by students in particular
because you know for example I have a
set of equations the navier stokes
equations tattooed here which are the
main equations of fluid dynamics and you
like as part of an exam even here not
you would probably need to know these
equations right and that could even very
be an exam question so I believe the
rules are that if you have a tattoo of
something which is part of the like the
course then you have to cover it in a
black tape no way you do examiners of
course you could just not declare it and
with it but if you were to declare it to
the examiners then it would have to be
covered in black tape and they would
have to check this before you entered
the room no you weren't cheating makes
sense and so we had another question in
which is kind of linked to what you were
talking about so you kept mentioning
your experiments and Makayla was
wondering have you ever tested your
model in the real world so how do you
actually go about looking at these
things experimentally very very good
question so first of all the idea of me
the experiments and this actually took
the first sort of year and a half nearly
two years of my PhD was thinking about
how can we recreate the real-world
situation realistically in the lab so
when we initially tried to do this the
main problem we had was we had a supply
of water sort of coming out of a pipe
but because pipes tend to be quite small
the water would shoot out like a jet
whereas in a river situation
like this doesn't behave like a hosepipe
yeah very sort of slow and plodding
compared to this JetLite behavior so
that was the main issue was sort of
figuring that out so we did think I lost
about that in designing the experiments
but then of course you still need to
test this in the real world and so I was
fortunate enough I had access to some
data for the North Sea so there was a
North it was called the North Sea
project very original name which was
done in the 1990s where basically they
had a ship and it just sort of sailed in
zigzags
all around the whole velocity over the
period of several years making
measurements everywhere of various
different properties of the ocean you
know depth temperature density yeah and
I had access to that data through my
because it was that was with the
Research Council who was funding me etc
and so I could use that as a starting
point but then I also actually got to go
see myself like I mentioned and this is
kind of by chance this wasn't really
planned as part of the project but
somebody else in the fluids group in
Cambridge was going on a research cruise
to Antarctica cool I wanted to go along
on this and it just so happened that I
actually had a very convincing
scientific reason to also join the
cruise so so they were going to study
you know something slightly different
they were sampling various things well
so there was kind of sampling large
vortices or large whirlpools they were
sampling those in the sort of the notion
so the big ocean around Antarctica and
that was for climate model purposes but
I managed they had some spaces on the
ship for extra scientific projects so
with my supervisor we put together this
sort of application for me to join in
saying that the whilst Antarctic has no
rivers of course it does have there's
large ice sheets and at the base of
those ice sheets you have the meltwater
so because of the friction of the ice
sheets sliding over the rock it will
start to melt and it creates on sort of
almost like underground streams and
these eventually leap into the ocean so
we wouldn't call them river
in the sense of like the River Thames
for example but it's still I have fresh
water which is lighter than the ocean
water entering the ocean so I've got
light water entering into heavy water
yeah so it's it's still the same
physical setup same foundations as a
river entering an ocean it sounds
legitimate reason to go on the Antarctic
expedition I managed to get some really
nice measurements you know and and sort
of it did more or less show this kind of
pattern so obviously that we couldn't
really measure the Vorta see the sorry
the large like whirlpool bit because we
didn't know where these streams appeared
because they're sort of hid underneath
the ice and we couldn't go that close
and the safety embarrassed but we did
see a very distinct coastal current so
there was a very clear layer of fresh
water around the coast in certain areas
of arctic air which was suggest could
even use that in fact to locate some of
these outflow streams from under the ice
based on the crash water being there
that I'm quite biased because of my own
research area but that sounds seriously
cool and yeah I I'm curious so did you
you sailed around the whole continent or
part Oh quite we kind of did like
various figure-eight patterns so so we
see for six weeks started in the
Falkland Islands and and it sort of did
round various patterns they're the best
of the best the funny thing about about
the voyage was the the main purpose was
this other project was called smiles
great name for the project and as I said
they're looking at climate models and to
get the particular data they wanted you
actually needed to take samples
following a storm so the Southern Ocean
is the stormiest ocean on the planet
yeah exactly
so so not only were we had the storm is
ocean of the planet we were purposefully
chasing storms in the stormiest ocean on
the flooding so it's ludicrous
from from someone who's been there
that's insane
but I like the commitment you force so I
think the scale goes up to 12
am I correct for the storms I think and
and we hit I think we had a force 10 and
a force 11 yeah that's that's pretty bad
pretty bad same one I hope your stomach
is it's nice and strong well it wasn't
so I I did I did have a period of
seasickness I think everybody at some
point had a few days of the seasickness
but the thing that really got me in this
entirely my own fault was on the in the
cabins so we had our beds the beds came
fitted with seat belts which in itself
is a bit crazy like why do don't you
think why does it badly to seatbelt this
is just gonna be uncomfortable to sleep
in and then so I wasn't wearing my
seatbelt
this is like a week or two in because
you know nothing that bad had happened
yet I thought this is this is a bit over
the top but obviously that was the night
where the the first the first big storm
hit and I was actually like thrown out
of my bed hit the wall suicide if I come
in the floor like oh okay that's the
stuff my seat belts my bed seat belt for
the rest of the trip I was gonna say you
land through that I'm sure only my own
father yeah we were told where your
belts in bed and you know the next day I
was saying to you anybody else had that
happened and they were like no we slept
fine because in bed oh that sounds that
sounds really cool and and again like
you might not necessarily have thought
through mathematics that you get to
travel somewhere like that and do that
kind of expedition so yeah for anyone at
home thinking where will maths take me
it could take you to Antarctica so okay
I have a question we might just need to
step back a bit because I digressed
about sea sickness from crave 585 hello
does this effect lead to any landforms
and are there any examples I don't know
if you can interpret that better than me
I guess um in terms of thought emotion
yeah the way I mean I would interpreting
this like you say could could not be
could be incorrect but I suppose in in
the context of a river with a very large
amount of sediment so the the sort of
let's take something like the Amazon
River or
Mississippi flowing down to to the US
both of those have very very large
amounts of sediment in the river and
there are really nice satellite images
you should totally go and Google like
satellite images of the Amazon you can
see it all coming out and it looks like
this you see it turns amazing yeah but
so so if it's carrying lots of sediment
then of course you will actually see
formation of sediment deposits centered
on one side versus the other depending
on where you are in the world so there
are absolutely very clear examples of
this I think there's a river the one
that I usually talk about it's called
the bird akin river in Australia and
it's very very obvious that because
we're in the southern hemisphere it will
turn to the left
so as the river flows out there are sort
of you get these mountains of sediment
all along the coast and you can very
clearly see the way that the water is
going in that direction but not the
other way
so from rivers with large sediments
content you can indeed spot this
behavior of left and right absolutely
and it's really interesting yeah I'm
definitely gonna go in to clean up now
and okay so the same person has asked an
unrelated question but I feel it would
be nice to ask it favorite Pokemon
favorite pack well I have the pokeballs
on my arm I think so I have the really
realistic one and then they have the
old-school pixelated one from the game
and I played as a kid because I couldn't
decide which one to get so my time Co
artist convinced me I should get both
because you know why make a decision
when you can have everything so I have
those two and I mean I actually have two
Pokemon tattoos on my leg which I
imported I'll show you my jeans are too
tight to roll up but I have two Pokemon
tattooed on my leg because again I
couldn't pick a favorite so I got my two
favorites from the original which would
be Butterfree the little butterfly one
and then zap dust which is the electric
bird so they were always my two
favorites again when I played as a kid
and I still play now I've 85
favorite pokemons done oh well I was
going to move on to another maths
question because this half-hour has just
flown by but just before we move on from
tattoos which is your favorite and which
is your least favorite I'm not sure that
his favorite is a fair question but well
I don't think I have a least favorite
so the moments that I think I got 56
last time I counted now at the moment
yeah Mike yeah I mean you obviously
can't really tell like this rackety so
many many cartoon of videogame
characters I'm actually been posting
pictures of some of them on my social
media so thank you go follow its knobs
for all of them saying you can take em
up so I don't think I have a least
favorite but in terms of favor it kind
of changes so I really like the two
pokeballs but they're quite recent so I
think you have that recency bias and
then like I said I've got lots of video
game and cartoon characters on my back
and I really like those especially
because one of them Crash Bandicoot it's
like an old-school PlayStation video
game this is spent my entire childhood
playing all of those games and my tattoo
artist like that's basically his
specialty is doing video game characters
you know like each artist has their own
particular thing they're sort of really
into you and that tattoo is and that one
definitely is on my Instagram that so
two is by far like the best tattoo I've
ever seen again I'm obviously biased but
I think that is probably my favorite
just because the the detail and the
quality is just incredible good answer
and I think also a good answer to say
that it varies because I mean they're
there now for light so you want to go
there sometimes as well because it's not
often you sort of see like you know the
backs of your thighs or your back even
really so yeah someone can compliment
you and then you'll be like yeah I've
got that cool and so I want to ask as
not often am i speaking to a mathematics
professional what is your favorite
number there are many to choose over
this
also leads into tattoos because it's
tattooed on my arm no way you know so I
think the best way to explain my
favorite number is going to be for me to
pose a little bit of a puzzle a bit of a
question in fact that way and then go to
it then I think you will see why it is
my favorite that's the idea so I'll just
click the board you're making me wish
that I had some sort of whiteboard or
blackboard in my house I know this isn't
your house but it were your words but
the dust is a nightmare why I'm having
to like wiping and wet it and everything
so I'm going to propose to you the the
following you're gonna pretend this is
like a game show and you have the choice
between for prizes shall we say so your
first choice option a is you can win
three pounds right now take home your
three pounds this is a budget game show
and option B is you can have one pound
but for the next year I will give you
one twelve interest every month okay so
it's kind of like an investment and
that's for one year that option C can I
just say it would be really good I don't
know if you're about to ask people which
they like it would be awesome to get
like in the comments what people think
about this as we go along it was exactly
what I was gonna do yeah and then we can
have one pound plus one fifty second
interest every week three I'm finally
option D why not do one pound plus one
360 fifth interest every day for a year
and I want to know which one do you pick
okay guys in the comments vote wait wait
wait yes I will clean the rest of the
board while you're doing that there
which one do we want
can I ask a question that's about the
Coriolis effect that just came in well
right I know we're asking people to cast
their minds back a little bit but Martin
wants to know whether hurricanes so air
forces also affected by this force and
if so can they cross the equator or does
that act as a kind of natural barrier
ooh that's a great question actually so
that the first part absolutely they are
affected so the this kind of leads into
the nice the myth of the water in your
in your sink going in opposite
directions
I always just about that earlier yeah
yeah and they will emphasize that one is
a myth right so that there's a very very
important sort of subtlety to the
Corollas force so the way I like to
think about it is right now as as humans
we do not feel the fact that the earth
is rotating right we know it is because
otherwise you know I guess everything
would just like end and blow up and who
knows what would happen so it is
rotating but we don't feel it and that's
because we are tiny compared to the size
of the earth but a river is much longer
it could be hundreds of kilometers long
and so the river is much more comparable
in size to the earth so the river feels
the rotation and therefore that's why it
behaves with this turning left to right
so with a hurricane a hurricane again
can be hundreds of kilometers across
when you see the satellite images you
perhaps don't realize when they show
this but that you know you have
hurricanes the size of countries from
view from above and so they feel it and
that is why you get the anti-clockwise I
think in the northern hemisphere or is
it clockwise it swaps confused it's it's
right so the right and left for the
river is correct yeah alternate rotation
of the hurricane one direction in the
north and it flips in the south yeah as
to whether the equator is a barrier I
honestly don't know I've never thought
about that which is a really really neat
question but when you're close to the
equator
the effect decreases rapidly mmm so for
example the Amazon River go back to the
river context that's really close to the
equator because the Amazon it's not
quite the equator but it's very very
close and the Amazon river water spreads
out equally in all directions
it doesn't really turn left or right
because it's very close to the equator
and so the Coriolis force is really
small it's very weak so similarly for a
hurricane I imagine they're probably
going to rotate really really slowly and
so whether it's so you know maybe it
would slow down its rotation as it moves
to the equator and perhaps if it passed
through it again I don't know if it is a
barrier or not that's interesting in a
very sure perhaps a climatologist would
actually know the answer or someone who
studies hurricanes baba but from the
masters you could see it working because
because it decreases so even though
you're still rotating in one direction
you're going so slow that you may as
well be at zero so you can see it
possibly could change yeah interesting
hey thank you very much it's it's good
to get the maths input and okay so well
well we've been chatting answers have
come in so let me just go through we've
got a vote for a a vote for D a vote for
C another vote for D and two more DS all
right so D is looking like the popular
choice from the audience but I'm glad
you've got some variety in there because
it shows that I can hopefully teach
everybody something so D is in fact the
correct answer
oh no no ignore me is the correct
confidence from the audience for D I
know I was like I just thought no you
say this is goods and well very well
done whoever said Abe everybody else
you're gonna learn something ok hey
excellent so the way to think about this
it's you can calculate exactly what BC
and D should be right we can we can
basically do the maths so for B what
we've got here is going to be 1 plus 1
12 and then we're multiplying that by
itself 12 times
because we're doing it so it's 1 plus
1/12 of its value and then if you then
squared that that would then give you
the amount after month 2 and if you took
it to the power 12 this gives you the
amount after a year you can sort of
convince yourself this works by
calculating the first few numbers but
this is the formula and this comes out
at and do have to check they're working
this is two pounds 61 but be so no abode
for B which is good because b is the
smallest now for c same formula but
we've got 1 over 52 and we're doing that
52 times so that one is 2 pounds to 59
so that's 8 pounds more than B and then
if we do it for B 1 plus 1 over 365 ^
365 that one gives you 2 pounds 71 so D
is better than B and C eepa a three
pounds is the winner so what we're doing
here is we're considering the formula so
here we've got a 12 and a 12 a 50 to 250
to 365 365 so what we've really got is 1
plus 1 over some number and then we take
the whole thing to the power of that
same number n so for B we've got N
equals 12 so see we've got N equals 52
and for D we've got N equals 365 these
are just three examples of this formula
and what we want to do or what might be
interesting to do is to say well these
are increasing as I increase M through
these three examples but what if I let n
what if I did this every second so I
think there are like three million
seconds in a year or something of that
order so if I did 1 power 1 plus 1 over
3 millions but then did it every second
for a year what will that give me for
example so if you did that one so I'll
just write if you did it for every
second the answer would be to pound 71
they'd actually be the same as what we
got here
it doesn't go up so it's not so what we
want to know is for this function as we
make n larger and larger so we're taking
the limit as n goes to infinity we're
making em bigger and bigger and bigger
and you can try this by plugging in
different values of n and see you'll
never go past a particular number and
this particular number is 2.718
continues forever and this is the number
and this number is my favorite number
because of this awesomeness of this
formula and it's equal to what we call e
not not what I was expecting but I can
definitely understand now why that is
your favorite number awesome answer and
I'm learning
everyone needs math teachers like you at
school this is great these things could
go on all afternoon how are you feeling
are you happy for like one more question
and then we'll wrap up I'm having great
time yeah well you know people in the
audience then do you still keep getting
involved I should say well done to crave
five eight eight five who did get the
answer right as a so whoo I guess I just
wanted to ask a little bit more than
going back to your kind of YouTube stuff
how you get the ideas for your videos
you know if there's anything in
particular you've been up to recently
feel free to plug in a thing you want to
[Music]
well I'll get the plug out of the way so
I've been recently doing a GCSE maths
series with the mass appeal team so this
is Bobby Siegel and Susan okay Ricky
they are both high school maths teachers
Bobby also does various things for the
BBC and he has his own what's it called
ma I'm in a seagull's Roadshow they
double around Britain and talk about
science it's very cool and so but Bobby
is Susan so there must each has actually
teach GCSE maths in school
and they created a podcast called mass
appeal talking through various
mathematical topics and then when I met
Bobby we decided that we should convert
this into a video series so basically we
filmed this last summer and then now we
finally got around to releasing all the
videos so we've been releasing a video
every Monday on a different GCSE maths
topic where each of us presents a
particular problem to do with that so
we've done like percentages we've done
travel graphs distance speed time and in
this week we did volumes so looking at
volume the 3d shapes and then we want
everybody to watch it sending their
questions and then we're gonna answer
them I'm doing a live stream every
Friday where I answer those questions in
fact basically this again but on a
particular theme shall we say rather
than a bit more open
no flailing around to various topics yes
it is a sort of ideas I guess in general
the thing I try to do when coming up
with so something like this for example
right so this was me would be how I
would explain to somebody what is e what
is Euler's number now you know the
approach the maths is actually just this
formula but my sort of thought process
was well if I just give somebody that
formula like okay it's what they need to
know ultimately but there's there's just
no real enjoyment to that okay actually
I say this I love that formula and but
if you're in my position maybe you also
could get a joint out just purely here's
the it's amazing formula but you know
the idea of just sort of this budget
game show that I came up with so when I
do this for example in a talk because I
often talk about this in one of my
school talks or something I actually
have the money in a pot and so the
person who's playing the game show gets
to pick and whatever they pick I will
give them you know two or three pounds
that they picked so I think for me it's
just about the the maths ideas are
already there so you know it's boiling
Bert's E and then it's just about
thinking how can I actually bring this
to life and make people who might not
like maths or might not normally want to
do maths
want to play because even if you don't
like maths you're kind of potentially or
hopefully you're a little bit interested
in which one of these is the one I
should pick like I want to win all the
money on the game show so it just turns
out that just solve it you need to do
some maths so I think that's the main
thing I tried to do I have my own idea
of what I think are nice max topics and
then it's just about trying to make it a
little bit different presented in a
slightly unique way or and try and make
it relevant I think it's because this is
a very abstract number it's quite hard
like most people won't have come across
a before so I have to come up with a
situation of our 10 game show that puts
it into a context where they can
appreciate the maths behind it
perfect yeah that makes so much sense as
you say it's all about making it
relatable and yeah it sounds excellent
and so if you have enjoyed this today
and you want to see more maths then do
tune in it's four o'clock on Fridays is
that right for the boys like early rye
oh yes mass appeal awesome and if you've
got questions in advance I where can
people send them to you anywhere on on
social media so just act Tom rocks
Matt's Instagram Facebook Twitter
YouTube Tom rocks mass comm there's a
contact form on my website there are you
can send me a send me something in the
post you know what however you want just
if you write it somewhere so that I will
see it we will then try and answer the
questions on Friday that's the idea by
any means possible love it
and wonderful say yeah I don't know is
there anything else you wish to share
with us Tom before we wrap up otherwise
it has been fantastic I think let's do a
final so I challenge myself to do
something recently which is for a video
I'm currently editing so will be up soon
which was to explain the Millennium
problems in under two minutes
so I will start by telling you what the
Millennium problems are and then I will
try and you can tell I mean if you want
I can mention them all in under two
minutes okay so the Millennium problems
in case you have never heard of these
are a series of maths problems that were
sort of put together so the problems
themselves have been around for a while
but the list of seven millennium
problems
was decided in the year 2000 and he's
worth deemed to be the most important
unsolved problems in maths 20 years ago
and the clay Institute in in America had
lots of money and decided they wanted to
promote and encourage more people to go
into maths and study maths and so they
said we will give anybody who can sold
one of these seven problems each one has
a 1 million dollar prize now I first
learned about this when I was a teenager
I'd like I want to say this probably did
play a role in begun not to become a
mathematician I've now realised that
these are really really hard but no I
wouldn't say I'm trying to solve them
necessarily but it certainly motivated
me because who doesn't want you know do
some your maths problem and get a
million dollars it sounds amazing
ya know the seven problems on the list
right so I'll try and do this quickfire
so the seven that made the list the
first one is the Riemann hypothesis this
one's pretty famous but basically we
have a function which we called the zeta
function doesn't really matter what it
is it's a complicated math thing and
what we think is when this function is
zero that is very closely related to
where the prime numbers are on the
number line so prime numbers don't have
a pattern they're not like even numbers
they don't go to four six eight you know
there's no pattern to the prime numbers
you have to sort of test can you divide
given 43 for example you have to figure
out in your head well is that actually
prime and so we think it's related to
the zeta function you get a million
dollars if you show that it is okay the
second one P versus NP so this is to do
with computers so we have two types of
problem we have the NP problems which
are things a computer can check the
solution to quickly so you set out your
problem whatever it is and you give the
computer a correct solution or what you
think is a correct solution and very
very quickly the computer can say yes or
no so it can check the solution quickly
you have another set of problems called
P which our problems a computer can
solve very quickly so again rather than
giving it a solution you give it the
probe
and it tooks back the answer superfast
right where we define fast by processing
time and different things and P versus
NP asks are these two problem sets in
fact the same so we think they are not
we think P does not equal NP we think
that it's possible to have a problem
which is hard to solve but easy to check
the answer to and but if you but we
can't prove it so if you prove it you
get a million dollars question three is
the navier-stokes equations my favorite
so I've already mentioned these so they
model the the motion of every fluid on
earth they work for physics and
engineering setups but mathematically we
just don't really understand them they
are very very complicated equations
because they're modeling so many
different situations solids liquids
gases so they're very very complicated
and we just don't really understand them
mathematically so you get a million
dollars for that for furthering our
understanding then we've got the
yang-mills mass cap hypothesis so this
is one to do with physics and talks
about quantum field theory we don't need
to worry about what that is the the key
idea here is physicists have a theory
that they can show is true by
experiments so they can verify their
theory yang-mills theory by experiments
we cannot prove it's true mathematically
so the job is can the mathematicians
write down the equations that agree with
what the physicists see in quantum field
theory get a million dollars the Hodge
conjecture this one is ridiculous
because depending on which mathematician
you ask to define it you will probably
get a different answer he's making very
very abstract it's very very complicated
in short it says given a particular type
of equation can I build the solution
from simpler solutions to other
equations so I always picture like the
world being built from Lego so he build
like a building out of Lego it's made
from smaller piece
which are the individual bricks this is
kind of saying is this true for this
particular mathematical situation it
should spin its entire conjecture this
one is to do with what we call elliptic
curves they're just a ticular type of
graph they're actually used in
cryptography and if you have an iPhone
and use iMessage your data is secured
through elliptic curve cryptography so
super applicable area of maths like it's
actually used everyday by Apple users
and this just asks about a way of
checking how many solutions a particular
elliptic curve equation has in short
that one's also quite maxi but has a
really nice application and finally the
seventh one is the Poincare conjecture
and this one's actually been solved so
possibly the most exciting because this
for me solved it doesn't into so it's
all very very early on so I think
everyone got really excited like oh
we're gonna now there's a million
dollars are gonna solve in a row and
then eight years later is still is still
six to go so this one basically said if
I have a shape which is smooth so no
sharp edges it has no poles and it
doesn't go on forever so it's finite can
i deform it into a sphere so imagine
having a blob of black play-doh that
this is you know that you can hold in
your hand and it's smooth so no sharp
edges and no holes you can just sort of
roll it together and get us there but
the punker conjecture says is this true
in any dimensions so not just in 3d but
in four and five and six and seven and
we knew it was chipping all of them
except dimension four and the
million-dollar problem which was solved
was can we prove it in four dimensions
which was done by a guy called Gregory
Perelman he was a Russian mathematician
hmm I was just gonna ask I felt he was
juicing some credit that's very nice
well I don't if this is the best the
worst bit of the story he turned down
the million dollars Wow
so he well I I think sorry he didn't
to give any interviews he's a very shy
person right so so this is all sort of
speculation but the theory is that he
kind of like he didn't do it for the
fame because he was working on this
before it was a million dollar problem
he was working on this in like 1990 and
trying to solve it because he thought
the maths was interesting so so he
thought didn't really care for the money
anyway and then I think again the theory
is that he didn't want the fame or the
publicity because when he actually
released his proof he just put it on the
Internet
he didn't even like announce to the
world or you know like oh but even
publish it you didn't even publish it in
a journal you just put it on the archive
is this like real but drops mic onstage
and walks off yeah so I think I think
again the theory is he didn't want the
fame but then what how do you become
more famous than the person who won a
million dollars
I personally turned down a million
dollars probably even more famous now I
think yeah a great story and also hats
off to you for just reeling off those
seven without any hesitation I realize
that that's okay no we're we're here I
yeah I can't believe how quickly the
time has gone and I suddenly found that
really really interesting so so thank
you so much for doing that and I'm just
gonna check I don't think we had any
last questions in because everybody was
so interested in hearing you so yeah I
mean if you have any other questions and
drop them in the comments below and then
I speak on his behalf but I'm sure Tom
wouldn't mind going and just taking a
look at those later if there was
anything else burning you want to send
me questions like I said on social media
or you know in the post message in a
bottle carrier Pidgeon whatever
wonderful and that's fantastic so yeah
send him your questions subscribe to his
channels and do you check in today's
videos on a four o'clock on a Friday to
check out the GCSE mass appeal and yeah
it's the in fact talking to you thank
you so much I think one of your kind of
tackle
his maths but not as we know it and I
can say that that in bruges day so thank
you so much if you've enjoyed this and I
want to check out more content from us
Ben we are takeovers live Q&A videos
every Tuesday and Thursday for the
foreseeable as part of our science at
home campaign so please do get involved
if there's anything in particular that
you would like to see any particular
fields you want us to cover then please
just get in touch we are totally open to
making this a conversation so thanks so
much do tune in on Thursday where we
will be chatting to dr. William glass
from the chemistry department all about
his work and in the meantime stay safe
and stay safe and we will see you soon
bye-bye
you